## Proof generation

To generate a STARK proof, we use `prove()` function from the [prover](/prover.rs) module. The function takes the following parameters:

* **trace**: `&TraceTable` - an execution trace resulting from executing a program. The trace table is built by the [processor](/../processor) module.
* **inputs**: `&[64]`
* **outputs**: `&[u64]`
* **options**: `&ProofOptions`

### Domains
Proof generation involve interpolating and evaluating a bunch of polynomials. These polynomials are interpolated and evaluated over various domains, and it is useful to understand what these domains are.

In general, domains for STARKs consist of successive powers of primitive roots of unity. Specifically:

<p align="center">
1, ω, ω<sup>2</sup>, ω<sup>3</sup>, . . . , ω<sup>n-1</sup>
</p>

where *ω* is the *n*-th primitive root of unity. You can also think of *n* as the size of the domain and of *ω* as the domain's generator.

There are 3 domains with which we'll be working:

1. Domain of the trace table or *D<sub>trace</sub>* generated by *ω<sub>trace</sub>*. The size of this domain is equal to the length of the execution trace, and it is the smallest domain out of the 3.
2. Constraint evaluation domain or *D<sub>eval</sub>* generated by *ω<sub>eval</sub>*. This domain is bigger than the trace domain by `MAX_CONSTRAINT_DEGREE`. Currently, `MAX_CONSTRAINT_DEGREE` is 8, so the constraint evaluation domain is 8 times bigger than the trace domain.
3. Low degree extension domain or *D<sub>lde</sub>* generated by *ω<sub>lde</sub>*. This domain is bigger than the trace domain by `extension_factor` parameter. `extension_factor` must be at least 16 (but may be significantly bigger) - so, LDE domain is the biggest one of the 3.

### 1. Extend execution trace

We can think of register traces in the execution trace table as evaluations of trace polynomials *T<sub>i</sub>(x)*. Thus, each row in the trace table can be written as:

<p align="center">
T<sub>0</sub>(ω<sup>i</sup><sub>trace</sub>), T<sub>1</sub>(ω<sup>i</sup><sub>trace</sub>), T<sub>2</sub>(ω<sup>i</sup><sub>trace</sub>), . . . T<sub>k</sub>(ω<sup>i</sup><sub>trace</sub>)
</p>

where, *k* is the number of registers, and *i* is the index of the row (same as the step of the computation).

To extend the trace table, we need to evaluate these polynomials over a larger domain. But since the trace table consists of polynomial evaluations, we first need to interpolate each register trace into a polynomial. We do this by running inverse FFT.

Then, trace polynomials are evaluated over *D<sub>lde</sub>* to generate the extended trace table (this is done by running regular FFT). Each row in the extended trace table can be written as:

<p align="center">
T<sub>0</sub>(ω<sup>i</sup><sub>lde</sub>), T<sub>1</sub>(ω<sup>i</sup><sub>lde</sub>), T<sub>2</sub>(ω<sup>i</sup><sub>lde</sub>), . . . T<sub>k</sub>(ω<sup>i</sup><sub>lde</sub>)
</p>

A couple of things to note:
1. The degree of trace polynomials is one less than trace length, or *deg(T<sub>i</sub>(x)) = |D<sub>trace</sub>| - 1*.
2. This step alone takes up about 50% of proof generation time (in single-threaded execution).

### 2. Build Merkle tree from the extended execution trace

After the execution trace table has been extended, we build a Merkle tree from the extended register traces. Leaves in the resulting tree will have the following form:

<p align="center">
Leaf<sub>i</sub> = (T<sub>0</sub>(ω<sup>i</sup><sub>lde</sub>), T<sub>1</sub>(ω<sup>i</sup><sub>lde</sub>), T<sub>2</sub>(ω<sup>i</sup><sub>lde</sub>), . . . T<sub>k</sub>(ω<sup>i</sup><sub>lde</sub>))
</p>

### 3. Evaluate constraints

### 4. Convert constraint evaluations into a single polynomial

### 5. Build Merkle tree from constraint polynomial evaluations

### 6. Build and evaluate deep composition polynomial

### 7. Compute FRI layers for the composition polynomial

### 8. Determine query positions

### 9. Build proof object


## Proof verification